---
title: "Comparison to EFA"
permalink: "/compare/"
layout: page
---

Similar to PCA and ICA, EFA is a data driven exploratory analysis method that can reduce dimensionality and identify patterns within data. However, EFA serves very different purposes from the two other techniques. EFA is primarily used in social science research for 1) identifying latent constructs and 2) developing measurement instruments. The goal of EFA is to model the correlation structure among variables to determine the number and characteristics of latent constructs that best explain the patterns of correlations among the measured variables. A classic example is the Big Five theory of personality (John & Srivastava, 1999), where researchers aimed to parsimoniously represent the vast array of personality descriptors in a set of core personality dimensions. They used EFA to analyze personality descriptors and concluded that personality traits could be represented by five fundamental factors: openness, conscientiousness, extroversion, agreeableness, and neuroticism. 


In contrast, the goal of PCA and ICA is not to explain the structure of correlations among measured variables, but rather to reduce the number of variables to a smaller set of components. These components are linear combinations of the original measured variables, *retaining as much information (or variance) as possible* from the original data. Unlike EFA, PCA and ICA prioritize capturing the variance in the data rather than explaining correlations (or covariances) between variables. The resulting components from PCA and ICA are also not inherently designed to be directly interpreted as meaningful latent constructs. Instead, the components serve to efficiently summarize and organize information from complex, high-dimensional datasets, such as those from fMRI. 


Further, components from PCA and ICA are not mathematically or conceptually equivalent to latent variables from EFA. Latent variables are unobservable latent constructs that are presumed to *cause* the measured variables. EFA partitions the variance in measured variables into common variance (shared by latent constructs) and unique variance (including measurement error). On the other hand, PCA and ICA omponents are directly constructed from the measured variables and contain both common and unique variance, without distinguishing between the two. EFA assumes the presence of measurement error as a part of the unique variance, while PCA and ICA assume that unique variance is zero, and that observed variables are related to components without measurement error. However, this assumption has less of a consequence in fMRI data. In fMRI research, the focus is on understanding the brain activity data directly, rather than on measuring an underlying construct. While in measurement scale data, where the aim is to measure a latent construct, assuming that measured data is perfectly reliable would be more unrealistic.
